---
toc: true
toc_label: "My Table of Contents"
toc_icon: "bars"
---

Determinism and Moral Responsibility in Spinoza’s The Ethics

Written by: William James

Phil 320: Knowing Oneself and Knowing the World: Early Modern Philosophy from Descartes to Kant

Introduction

In this paper I will explore themes of determinism and moral responsibility as they appear in Spinoza’s The Ethics. As Albert Einstein states “I believe in Spinoza’s god, who reveals Himself in the lawful harmony of the world, not in a god who concerns himself with the fate and the doings of mankind.” (Livio) I lack the genius and hair of Einstein, though we have each developed views similar to those held by Spinoza. Understanding Spinoza’s naturalism through an amended perspective is the key to understanding his determinism and the moral responsibility that follows.

I think that the following excerpt, from someone whose name I share, will set the stage for its deliverance: “The abuse of technicality is seen in the infrequency with which, in philosophical literature, metaphysical questions are discussed directly and on their own merits”. Almost always they are handled as if through a heavy woolen curtain, the veil of previous philosophers' opinions. Alternatives are wrapped in proper names, as if it were indecent for a truth to go naked” (15, A Pluralistic Universe, William James). The veil of previous philosopher’s opinions will not work for me as I have not found my analysis in full elsewhere. Employing such technicality will not aid in the direct communication of the metaphysical truths I grapple with. I refuse to use further sources beyond Spinoza’s work in the presentation of my analysis for the sake of an obscuring convention.

I will begin with a presentation of Spinoza’s determinism followed by a presentation of his moral responsibility. Then I will review the naturalism that functions as the bedrock for Spinoza’s claims on psychology. Thirdly I will present my integration of Spinoza’s naturalism with a model of cognitive economics. Following the articulation of this unique lens, I will apply it to understand Spinoza’s determinism and his Moral Responsibility once more. I will conclude this paper by presenting an argument that prima facie appears counter to the claims I am making but is actually compatible with my lens. I will also include some concluding views that directly support the claims this paper is making. What I will be defending is that the structure of Spinoza’s views on determinism and moral responsibility may best be understood when viewed from a perspective of his psychological naturalism with the addition of a model of cognitive economics.

Spinoza’s Determinism
Deterministic views are often compared to free will perspectives and are believed to come in direct opportunity cost with one another. Views that fall in the middle ground are often classified under the category of compatibilism. Spinoza provides a definition of free will that displays what he perceives is actually being communicated, “men are deceived in that they think themselves free [NS: i.e., they think that, of their own free will, they can either do a thing or forbear doing it], an opinion which consists only in this, that they are conscious of their actions and ignorant of the causes by which they are determined. This, then, is their idea of freedom-that they do not know any cause of their actions.” (The Ethics, P35, 137) His rejection of traditional free will is not a complete rejection of agency in his deterministic picture. He leaves room for being labeled a compatibilist. Since the decisions of men are an integrated part of nature, one's decisions feed back into determining what the future conditions of nature are and how they play out. This larger feedback loop depicting the relations between causes, actions and consequences is the information that when not understood, deceives men into claiming free will.

Spinoza's deterministic picture of the world denies free will, but still places importance upon the decisions of men. It is this importance on the decisions and actions of men that will lead us to his theme of moral responsibility. For Spinoza the world is ultimately determined by God, which he views as synonymous with nature. Under Spinoza’s framework when one refers to God, they are referring to the entire system that constitutes nature. If one understands the causes of one’s actions and their consequences within this dynamical feedback system of nature, then a freedom greater than freedom of the will may be achieved.

Spinoza’s Moral Responsibility

Moral responsibility in Spinoza’s The Ethics constitutes the prescription of living a life according to reason. Spinoza claims this as the path to freedom in the deterministic world. I claim that this is best understood as freedom from the computational error or imprecision generated by alternative forms of cognitive processing, by use of the affects. For Spinoza if one can live a life according to reason, then they have the moral responsibility of doing so. If they abdicate reason for a dependence on the affects, then they are inviting unnecessary computation error into their lives. Since the methods of the mind are in part being used to solve the decision-making problem of how to preserve being, any errors that are produced compound into significant consequences for one's body. To avoid such consequences, one just needs to avoid the computational error that such error stems from and thus live a life according to the dictates of reason.

I will be using this analysis of Spinoza’s views to conduct a deeper analysis of the work and its consequences. Please accept my arguments and claims as valid. I claim the addition of a model of cognitive economics to Spinoza’s naturalism will bring a deep understanding of Spinoza’s prescriptions of morality.  

Spinoza’s Naturalism 

The following is a core metaphysical claim that underlies my understanding of Spinoza’s naturalism: “Each thing, insofar as it is in itself, strives to persevere in its being.” (The Ethics, pg. 198) Take yourself for example. You may be identified, at least in part, by your striving to preserve your own being. Breaking this abstract domain of “striving” down into categories of causes further clarifies this claim. You are (1) the structures and functions and structures that directly generate your being. You are the structures and functions that resolve “threats to [the generation of] your being.”  Drawing from Darwin, I believe that an appropriate name for threatening structures and functions to be that of “selection pressures”. Applying this interpretation, we find that each thing may be identified with the set of causes that aggregate to generate being and resolve the selection pressures applied to being.

Spinoza identifies three core affects, or ‘emotions’: desire, pleasure and pain. Pleasure is experienced when a man transitions from a past state to a future state that consists of greater perfection. Pain is experienced when a man transitions from a past state to a future state that consists of lesser perfection. Desire sets the constraints of what constitutes a state of perfection, it identifies what is conducive to self-preservation. This interpretation is backed by Spinoza saying "I really recognize no difference between human appetite and desire. For whether a man is conscious of his appetite or not, the appetite still remains one and the same." The primary function desires and appetites do is set the constraints that govern the pleasure and pain feedback mechanisms. If desire just so happens to map to generating causes of one's being, along with the resolution of selection pressures to one’s being, then these three effects in conjunction serve as a being preservation algorithm. If desire does not map effectively to what constitutes the striving to preserve being, then the output behavior of relying on the affects is also not effective. If the decisions produced by affects are imprecise, then dependence upon them in the preservation of being will also produce imprecise results.

Naturalism and Cognitive Economics

Cognitive economics is not a new theory as it was first articulated by thinkers as early as Ernst March. What I am referring to is the tracking and allocation of energy throughout one’s mind. A model of cognitive economics is one that attempts to track how energy is distributed across one’s various cognitive structures and functions. Such a lens translates Spinoza’s moral prescriptions of rationality and reason into budgeting prescriptions that govern the allocation of cognitive resources. Adopting such a cognitive budget may be interpreted as an attempt to eliminate the computational errors of consciousness that inhibit effective preservation of being.

The model of cognitive economics I claim should be amended to Spinoza’s naturalism is abstractable from the direct experiences of many people. When one uses instinct, they gain the ability to act quickly, but sacrifice precision. When one uses emotions, the affects, they gain the ability to pursue the aims set forth by their appetites and desires, but at the cost of more time and energy then instincts use. Reason enables precise articulation of the appetites and desires. It also enables precise generation of potential solutions, but these benefits come at the cost of much computational time and energy.

The feedback signals generated by the affects are more precise than those of the instincts when long-term preservation is the aim. Using Spinoza’s model they encode a basic positive signal, pleasure, and a basic negative signal, pain. These signals resemble a basic climbing type optimization model that seeks to generate actions conducive with the preservation of being. Spinoza identifies derivative emotions that alter this binary signal, sometimes producing more effective behaviors, sometimes not. The error of the emotions is that they lack means of breaking free of local optimization. If one wants to reach the global maximum of pleasurable inputs, then they may have to sacrifice a local maximum of pleasure. When one employs reason, they can identify when their emotions would lead to a local maximum. One can then correct for the error that is produced and set their cognitive faculties off once more in search of a global maximum.

The review of the affects presented in The Ethics does not directly articulate the benefit of sacrificing precision for the gain of efficiency when budgeting one’s cognitive economics. The review primarily presents claims that dependence on the affects produces errors that are not found when one employs reason. While ultimately a component of reason, Spinoza didn’t identify use of the instincts becomes ideal when computational economic constraints don’t allow for use of the affects. He didn’t identify that use of the affects becomes ideal when computational economic constraints don’t allow for use of reason. Most importantly he didn’t articulate that the generation and use of heuristics can encode the wisdom of reason, without the high computational cost.

I think that I have seen the error of Spinoza’s moral claims, and now I see the error of my own audacity. My refusal to build upon the work of others prevents the use of their credibility and authority as a heuristic. If I could understand such work, then it cheaply signals that what I write will be somewhat comprehensible. I have prevented the reader thus far from using a time saving heuristic and requested a more costly engagement in hopes to provide a clearer picture. This additional cost draws from the reader's finite pool of time and energy. If the reader wishes to budget their resources efficiently, then by inducing additional cost I threaten such budgeting strategies. In threatening the reader’s budgeting strategies, I am indirectly threatening the being such strategies functions to preserve. To amend this additional cost I am potentially imposing, I will employ the work of credible authors in analyzing my claims towards the end of this paper. I will attempt to encode any wisdom in the technicality of academic philosophy now that I understand the reasonable value it has potential to provide.    

The actions of my writing style threatened the use of a single wisdom encoding heuristic, the use of credible sources of analytic authority. Spinoza threatened the heuristic use of all of the wisdom encoded in the Judeo-Christian culture. His metaphysics eliminated a personified God and replaced it with a complex deterministic world of nature. By threatening the world views of his time Spinoza threatened the strategies that were in place to preserve being. By threatening the strategies people were employing he indirectly threatened their being. I believe this shows why Spinoza was subject to harem and received much negative feedback in the expression of his ideas; he was actively inducing an indirect threat to all those around him. There is a potential justification for imposing such a cost that is congruent with his central metaphysical claim. It could be justified if paying the cost (1) provides individuals with better methods of preserving being and (2) individuals are resilient enough to afford paying the cost.

Applying Naturalism and Cognitive Economics to Spinoza’s Determinism  

There is another looming threat inherent in a life of reason. A deterministic world view allows one to model the causes and consequences of their actions. It also enables clear perception of threats to being, past, present, and future. There is a large computational jump from using the imprecise signaling of the affects to developing and employing highly precise models of solutions. The appetites and desires that emotional processing strives towards can only encode so many of the problems that select against one’s being. It shifts the resolution of one’s world view from the pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain to a near infinite list of threats to being. To demonstrate this threat, I must defer to the reader to look up Roko’s Basilisk problem as an example of future blackmail. I will not discuss it further here.

Applying Naturalism and Cognitive Economics to Spinoza’s Moral Responsibility

Spinoza didn’t articulate the utility in generating and employing imprecise low-cost heuristics, but he did perceive it to some extent. We see it in some ideas he explores, like the education of individuals about what constitutes good and evil. Spinoza says, “But we ought also to note here that it is no wonder sadness follows absolutely all those acts which from custom are called wrong, and joy, those which are called right. From what has been said above we easily understand that this depends chiefly on education. Parents-by blaming the former acts, and often scolding their children on account of them, and on the other hand, by recommending and praising the latter acts-have brought it about that emotions of sadness were joined to the one kind of act, and those of joy to the other.” (The Ethics, 197) In the education of children, the model of which actions constitute the preservation of being may be encoded into what is considered right and wrong. Educated individuals may then use pursuit of what is right and wrong as a cheaper heuristic in wisely preserving being.

If such social customs, like education, encode effective strategies that lead to the preservation of being, then the consequences can be achieved at a cheaper computational cost to the individual. If they do not, then individuals may still find value in them for reducing computation, but they then suffer the negative consequences of poorly mapped heuristics. It falls to the men of reason to not only generate effective strategies for themselves, but to also work to encode them into the heuristics they and others employ.

If we as individuals and as a society are to achieve the blessed existences spoken of by Spinoza, then we must learn from the wisdom he presents, “The fact is that Spinoza is made a testing-point in modern philosophy, so that it may really be said: You are either a Spinozist or not a philosopher at all” (Hegel, in Lectures on the History of Philosophy, 1896). Understood through the conjunction of Spinoza’s naturalism and cognitive economics, I take this quote to define the role of the modern philosopher. It is the philosopher’s job to understand precisely the threats to being in their entirety and with maximized precision. Those who do not employ their reasoning faculties to their limits to understand such problems are not embarked on the philosopher's quest of understanding the world. Such thinkers are instead valuing the security offered by the computational resources saved through employing imprecise models of the world. Conserving resources is a completely reasonable strategy, but if such imprecise models gain popularity and are preserved when resources are present in excess, then error is being generated unnecessarily.

Accordingly, the thinkers that induce noise upon the world may not be given the title of philosophers, but they can be given the title of artists. The benefits of self-inducing noise upon one’s worldview are displayed through Schopenhauer’s life as a direct example. They are later articulated by Friedrich Nietzsche and by the psychoanalysis work of Otto Rank. The following quote from the Gay Science depicts the concept well: “How can we make things beautiful, attractive, and desirable for us when they are not? And I rather think that in themselves they never are. Here we could learn something from physicians, when for example they dilute what is bitter or add wine and sugar to a mixture-but even more from artists who are really continually trying to bring off such inventions and feats.” (Gay Science, 299, pg. 239) To Friedrich Nietzsche, part of the value of art was to dilute the complexity of the world, of everything that threatens our being, down so that we can bear looking upon it. Practically understood art and other forms of “impracticality” may strengthen us through providing us artificial feedback, or by reducing our perception of problems that require attention. Such transformation upon one’s perceptions function to enable progressive thought and action despite the near infinite list of threats inherent in reality. Spinoza’s The Ethics did not capture this value of art and of responsible noise induction in its prescriptions of moral responsibility. This lack of articulation means the man of reason that is directly communicated in the text alienated from employing such budgeting strategies. The lack of budgeting heuristics in Spinoza’s The Ethics makes his man of reason a moral responsibility that is poorly adapted to constraints of low time and energy, of low computational resources. It is only optimized for fools, those willingly venturing unknown territory despite the risk to being, or for those who are continuously subject to luxurious conditions in life and can explore the unknown in security.

Perturbing and Supporting Arguments

I will now proceed to draw upon the work of Spinoza’s scholars. This will have the aim of defending my claim that Spinoza’s views on determinism and moral responsibility are best understood when a concept of cognitive economics is coupled with his naturalistic account. I first invoke the argument against the success of Spinoza’s naturalism presented by the author of the Cambridge Companion.

The author of the Cambridge Companion argues that Spinoza must establish two specific claims for his naturalism to follow from his metaphysics. “In order to establish his naturalism, Spinoza would need to show that the following two claims are true: (1) There are laws or rules governing the psychological states of human beings. (2) These laws or rules are instances of more general laws or rules operative throughout nature. (Cambridge Companion, 192) I agree with this and will eventually argue that both claims are true. However, this opposing view is reached in the Cambridge Companion. Here Spinoza’s naturalism is observed to be a product of his metaphysical claim that "Each thing, insofar as it is in itself, strives to persevere in its being". While we both start looking to derive Spinoza’s naturalism from his metaphysical claims, our conclusions ultimately differ. Employing the perspective presented above I find success in Spinoza’s establishment, while Rocca finds incompleteness.

In Cambridge Companion, the author concludes “one should be aware at the outset that Spinoza does not successfully carry out his project for psychology” (Cambridge Companion, 193). He validates Spinoza’s success in displaying laws that govern psychological phenomena, and thus shows 1. However, he claims that Spinoza fails to display 2, that he does not show these laws to be instances of more general laws of nature. I do not have time here to give arguments in the Cambridge Companion complete justice in decomposing and analyzing them. I sacrifice a fine grain review for the gain of expediency. In doing so I demonstrate that the rules governing my psychological phenomenon are in turn governed by the more general economical rules of nature.

The explanation of how cognitive economics impacts my writing style actively demonstrates a naturalist description of 2 that would push Spinoza to success on his psychological project. Since this concept of cognitive economics was absent in The Ethics, I must agree with the Cambridge companion that Spinoza didn’t fully articulate these more general laws and their consequences. Alone Spinoza was unsuccessful in his psychological project, but with the amendment of a model of cognitive economics his naturalist world becomes clear. I also believe that the amendment of cognitive economics helps to weed out the confusion presented in the counter examples of the Cambridge Companion’s arguments, but such analysis will not be covered here.

The exploration of blessedness in Nadler’s introduction directly supports the idea that the moral life is one where one is actively resolving the threats to their being, as exemplified by the following quote: “The virtuous person, the individual who follows ‘the order of nature,’ will experience ‘true peace of mind’ (VP42s); by contrast, the ignorant person is ‘troubled in many ways by external causes.’” (Nadler, 256). The author goes beyond my argument to state that a troubled person is one who ignores both threats to being and the order of nature. I’m inclined to agree with this and find the appended naturalism presented here to more precisely articulate how people tend to avoid following the order of nature.

Appending cognitive economics to Spinoza’s naturalism alters what exactly one falls within the domain of moral responsibility. The requirements of Spinoza’s blessed life are made much more precise by doing so. He says, “P36: The greatest good of those who seek virtue is common to all and can be enjoyed by all equally.” (The Ethics, 234) Through the lens provided in this paper this now means one must take responsibility for resolving the threats to their own being and the being of those around them. Not just for the moment, but for as much time into the future that can be accounted for. The size scope for both people and timeframes are limited by the pragmatic budgeting constraints imposed upon the individual's cognitive faculties. One must allocate the dynamic use of their cognitive faculties appropriately. One must take responsibility for generating the computational resource conserving heuristics that we use. One must take responsibility for the errors that such heuristics produce in attempting to preserve being. Artists must be separated out from philosophers, and beauty must be invoked with the responsibility of preserving being in mind.

Amending cognitive economics to Spinoza’s naturalism generates a precise, but difficult to achieve model of what moral responsibility consists of. The blessedness achieved by a moral individual under such a perspective cannot be defined as a simple task, for it is a difficult one. As Spinoza said, “If the way I have shown to lead to these things now seems very hard, still, it can be found. And of course, what is found so rarely must be hard. For if salvation were at hand, and could be found without great effort, how could nearly everyone neglect it? But all things excellent are as difficult as they are rare.” (Spinoza, pg. 265) Sometimes a difficult path is worth walking, even if one must walk it alone.





Works Cited

Books from the Course Page:

Spinoza, B. de, & Curley, E. (1994). A spinoza reader: The ethics and other works. Princeton University Press.
Rocca, M. D. (2008). Spinoza. Routledge.
Garrett, D. (2006). The cambridge companion to spinoza. Cambridge University Press.
Hampe, M., Schnepf, R., & Renz, U. (2011). Spinoza's ethics: A collective commentary. Brill.
Nadler, S. M. (2009). Spinoza's ethics: An introduction. Cambridge University Press.
Articles:

Roko. (n.d.). Roko's basilisk. LessWrong. Retrieved March 16, 2022, from https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/rokos-basilisk
Nadler, S. (2020, April 16). Baruch Spinoza. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved March 30, 2022, from https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/spinoza/
Livio, M. (2018, October 11). Einstein's famous "God letter" is up for auction. Scientific American Blog Network. Retrieved April 18, 2022, from https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/einsteins-famous-god-letter-is-up-for-auction/
Additional Books:

JAMES, WILLIAM (2016). Pluralistic Universe Hibbert Lectures at Manchester College on the present situation in philosophy. KRILL PRESS.
Nietzsche, F. W., & Kaufmann, W. (1974). The gay science: With a prelude in rhymes and an appendix of song. Vintage Books.