---
title : "The Articulation Episode Eight: Systems Thinking and Integrated Truth - Part Two"
toc: true
toc_label: "My Table of Contents"
toc_icon: "bars"
---
# Systems Thinking and Integrated Truth: Part Two | William James

## Psychology as Nested Optimization
- Identity is better understood as the function model of oneself in the world. This functional model is constituted by a combination of the responsibilities (subconscious too) that one takes. These responsibilities have the individual take in input information, transform it according to the constructive algorithms allowed under computational constraints, and execute the resulting behavior. 
- Social systems may prescribe sets of behaviors that constitute a given identity. The feedback these people use, their sense of “self esteem”, is generated by their success in successfully executing their identity. This also retains the benefit of lowering locally perceived responsibility and thus the demands of computation required by the individual. 
- Individuals can transcend these prescriptions by looking at the underlying set of problems that need to be solved, and set their identity as an attempted solution to them given their constraints. This seems to partially constitute self actualization, problem solving optimization given whatever constraints one has. Think of people like Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. 
- By identifying with systems you exist within, you are artificially reducing the computation of accounting for yourself. By identifying yourself as an individual in an uncritical manner, you are reducing computation by not looking at your environment and the change of the environment over time. 
- Identifying with yourself in a critical manner requires accounting for yourself, your relation to other systems, and eventually other systems. To do so optimally you would have to have a model of your own cognitive economy so you adjust the scope of the systems you are accounting for according to your capabilities.
- Identities are often set to avoid what would otherwise be a very difficult computational problem. Emulating strategies can be engineered to account for the frugality value of using socially derived identities. The current identity politics that we are employing are very poorly designed means of enabling this emulating process. Individuals still fall for it as it functions to reduce computational demands. 
  
## Objectivity vs. Subjectivity
- Finally, as knowers, let us not be ungrateful towards such resolute reversals of familiar perspectives and valuations with which the mind has raged against itself for far too long, apparently to wicked and useless effect: to see differently, and to want to see differently to that degree, is no small discipline and preparation of the intellect for its future ‘objectivity’ – the latter understood not as ‘contemplation (Anschauung) without interest’ (which is, as such, a non-concept and an absurdity), but as having in our power the ability to engage and disengage our ‘pros’ and ‘cons’: we can use the difference in perspectives and affective interpretations for knowledge. From now on, my philosophical colleagues, let us be more wary of the dangerous old conceptual fairy-tale which has set up a ‘pure, will-less, painless, timeless, subject of knowledge’, let us be wary of the tentacles of such contradictory concepts as ‘pure reason’, ‘absolute spirituality’, ‘knowledge as such’: – here we are asked to think an eye which cannot be thought at all, an eye turned in no direction at all, an eye where the active and interpretative powers are to be suppressed, absent, but through which seeing still becomes a seeing-something, so it is an absurdity and non-concept of eye that is demanded. There is only a perspectival seeing, only a perspectival ‘knowing’; the more affects we are able to put into words about a thing, the more eyes, various eyes we are able to use for the same thing, the more complete will be our ‘concept’ of the thing, our ‘objectivity’. But to eliminate the will completely and turn off all the emotions without exception, assuming we could: well? would that not mean to castrate the intellect? . . . Friedrich Nietzsche
- There are two ways of framing what “Objectivity” means:
- First, generate knowledge by transforming it with the constraints imposed by the continuous survival of nested systems. I.e. Objectivity is what accounts for everything, your constraints as a person included. This is what Nietzche looked to defend. Continuously expand the system that is being accounted for, expand the will. This is what Ayn Rand’s  Objectivists mean when they employ the concept. The objectivists are those who can account for the complexity of their own needs, nested within the needs of others that are introduced when looking to account for the long term. 
- Second, generate knowledge by introducing no transformation beyond those unknowingly imposed by the language and the unarticulated psychological transforms. This generates the value of enabling vast amounts of people to grasp “objectivity” as it severely reduces the computational requirements of generating “objective” knowledge. This second perspective is what was promoted by Thomas Nagel in “The View From Nowhere”. He does just the opposite of what Nietzche worked to prevent. The popularity of this view is that it enables many more people to participate in the generation of valued “objective” truth.
- The consequence of the first definition of objective truth, is that the generation of solutions that generate value for large scoped systems is continuously increased. It functions as a means of approximating ethical integrated truth. Ultimate objective truth is knowledge that is passed through a vast set of constraints. As a result of not being gods ourselves, we then have an aim in which we can continuously approximate and error correct around. We can employ the most precise set of objective truth that is available to us at the given time.
- The consequence of the second definition is that the optimization constraints needed for knowledge generation are removed. This enables many more people to make claims on objectivity. This definition removes precision from the generation of knowledge. If run to its full extreme, then the constraints of the individual are removed. Then the constraints of community, then society, then humanity, then life, then existence itself. By allowing knowledge to be generated without accounting for any system, you are abdicating responsibility for evolutionarily selecting for those systems. Such a definition of objectivity is ignoring the selection pressures that need to be accounted for if systems are to survive. The ultimate conclusion of this definition of objectivity is an existence that is independent from any system. It is the castration of not only the intellect, but the systems that look to use the intellect as an adaptive tool as well. 
- By identifying the computational frugality value of the second definition and clinging to it, we are
- I suggest we look to retain Nietzche’s and Rand’s perspective on Objectivity, but then also design emulation systems. This way people can gain the benefits of employing the products of complex objectivity, without needing people to directly pay the computational cost. 

## Godel's Incompleteness Theorem 
- The analysis of truth provided in the last is consistent with Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem.
- People use Godel’s Incompleteness theorem as an avoidance mechanism to reduce complexity.
- This is my first attempt to integrate it with the rest of my perspective. 
 
### First Incompleteness Theorem 
- “Any consistent formal system F within which a certain amount of elementary arithmetic can be carried out is incomplete; i.e., there are statements of the language of F which can neither be proved nor disproved in F.”
- “For any statement  A unprovable in a particular formal system F, there are, trivially, other formal systems in which A is provable (take A as an axiom).”
- What is provable in system F is determined by the set of constraints that determine system F. To make something provable in system F, change the constraints that system F is a response to. 
- Formal systems are designed against the criteria of their constraints. What they are trying to show, the information and complexity available to the language user.
- For any statement A unprovable in a particular formal system F, it becomes provable in other formal systems with A as an axiom, or the generator functions of A.
- I take this to reflect the structure of language, and how systems of language and thought produce perspectives. If someone wants to make an idea provable, they may alter the constraints of a worldview and language to produce said idea.
The ultimate test of languages and formal systems is how well they effectively generate, map out and employ solutions to the selection pressures of the systems they select for. - In other words the ultimate set of constraints that generate mathematics are the evolutionary ones. 

### Second Incompleteness Theorem
- “For any consistent system F within which a certain amount of elementary arithmetic can be carried out, the consistency of F cannot be proved in F itself.”
This is directly indicative of the evolutionary nature of arithmetic, it is proved consistent outside of the system itself. Either in conjunction with the generator functions/ constraints of/ on the system itself, or within another formal system that enables those to be mapped out within it. 

### Conclusion on Godel
- I will revisit Godel later in a more in depth manner.
- Godel shows the evolutionary nature of language systems. 