---
title : "Potential Devolopemental Strategies for Existential Heroes"
toc: true
toc_label: "My Table of Contents"
toc_icon: "bars"
---

**By William James**

This article is a response to part five of the bend not break series presented by Daniel Schmachtenberger and Nate Hagens. My question generally stated is **Why do you see the scaling of the empathetic incentive as the only viable developmental approach forward?** I have some developmental strategies of my own that appear to function prima facie. I'd like you to review them and identify design flaws, while considering the viability of future iterations. 

My term *Existential Hero* refers to someone who is able to effectively grapple with large scale problems in a psychologically grounded fashion. The term *hero* has its own set of connotations, that when not taken too seriously adds some light and humor to what is normally an anxiety provoking and disheartening topic, existential risk. As an enthusiast of the table top game Dungeons & Dragons, I have set *Existential Heroism* as the developmental goal of the player characters within the game that I run. I sincerely think that *Existential Heroism* is an appropriate developmental aim in real life too, so I will use the term here without shame. 

Video Link: https://youtu.be/Kep8Fi_rUUI?t=1158 

*If you let yourself feel, it's easy to just feel completely broken right and um get completely pulled into "I just need to be at this refugee camp working here and not think about can I do something at scale". This spiritual psychological work to feel the depth of those feelings and transmute it into more devotion and more agency and more strength to be able to serve and keep that high touch and figure out how to do strategy effectively is the only way forward I know that well it's viable.

As identified by this Daniel Schmachtenberger, the clearest viable strategy for the development of what I call **Existential Heroism** is the scaling of these empathetic relations with the community and larger world. I will refer to this developmental strategy as as **Empathy Scaling**.  In my analysis it empathy scaling the core strategy of the effective altruism community. Empathy scaling asks the individual to deeply draw upon empathetic connections with other creatures as a grounded intrinsic incentive. It then asks individuals to transmute/ map the expression of those feelings to strategy that is effective at scale. Given the story of development that Daniel publicly presents, this appears to be the developmental strategy he used in his life. 

This is the only developmental strategy that Daniels see's as a way forward. However, I have discovered/ designed two other developmental strategies that I believe may be viable to deploy in parallel with **Empathy Scaling**. I ask that you explore each of these and present your own analysis. These two strategies will be named, **Immortality Quest** and **Incentive- Deterrent Mapping** respectively.

First the **Immortality Quest** developmental strategy is a throwback to The Epic of Gilgamesh. This strategy asks one dive commit fully to the pursuit of human-centered biological immortality. In other words, it ramps up the selfish incentive for self-preservation and individual life-affirmation to max. Immortality may more pragmatically be understood as the achievement of continuous life. As a lifestyle this is the production of behavior that continuously resolves mortal and incapacitating threats. This incentive structure demands that solutions to personal risks, mundane through existential, be included in the domain of personal responsibility. 

As a though experiment as yourself what it would take to maximize your selfishness. Keep asking yourself "what problem is next"? When ever I share this thought experiment I get something like the following: First is meeting basic needs. Next is sustainable shelter, followed by continuous personal resources, followed by *individual biological immortality*, followed by curing disease, followed by world peace/ cooperation, followed by accident mitigation. At this point, people tend to start listing off the diverse set of existential risk, like closed loop sustainability, nuclear fallout, asteroid collision avoidance, sun burning out, entropy of the universe... The point is selfish incentives eventually accounts for existential risk. One just needs a sense of self that is afflicted by such risks and pursuit of individual biological immortality is what enables that. 

If the **Immortality Quest** is to function as a developmental strategy of existential heroism, then it will need to include existential threats to the more general continuation of life in the domain of responsibility. This structure is already included by the dictates of pragmatic strategy. Since the individual does not exist as an isolated system, they cannot abdicate responsibility for their environment if they are to ensure their own survival. If the individual's agency is going to be expanded to the point in which they can effectively resolve all potential mortal risks for all of time, including the exhaustion of our sun and the heat death of the universe, they will need quite a bit of agency. Where would they get this agency? They could get it from machines/ technology alone, but that makes all other life an enemy, introducing a significant amount of fragility into their immortality quest. Therefore resiliency must also be taken into account across the a continuous domain. To maximize resiliency across a continuous domain, a strategy that includes personal responsibility for humanity and life at large is then incentivized.   

The **Immortality Quest** naturally converges upon incentivizing behavior that functions at scale and for the long term continuation of life. Since this domain of responsibility overlaps with the incentive structure of **Empathy Scaling**, both developmental strategies may be used in parallel to produce further motivation for resolving long-term, large scale issues. The differences in incentivized behavior between the **Immortality Quest** and **Empathy Scaling** instead occur at the more localized level. **Empathy Scaling** demands that some agency must be invested into the localized alleviation of suffering for creatures of which empathy may be applied.  For example, I am particularly weak to the suffering of dogs. If I am to apply empathy scaling as a motivational structure in my life, then the dogs must accounted for, otherwise my attempt to scale empathy won't drive long-term behavior. It would be hampered by the local suffering I am faced with instead. On the other hand I use the **Immortality Quest** Incentive structure, then I am forced to mitigate personal risk and more coldly optimize my investments of agency such that I am ensuring that my life in general will be continuous. 

To further illustrate the difference in these developmental methods, I find it useful to understand the cause areas they incentives in the near term. Where someone using the **Empathy Scaling** incentive structure would want to invest agency in animal welfare, someone using the **Immortality Quest** incentive structure would want to invest agency into the medical field, specifically longevity and anti-aging. To further drive solutions to the shared landscape of existential risk, I suggest we enable the both incentives structures to function at scale. We should integrate investing into both animal welfare and longevity research, and treat them both as instrumental causes that drive solutions to existential risk.

For as wacky as the **Immortality Quest** is, the developmental method of **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** may actually be more difficult for many people. The underlying model that this developmental is designed upon is reviewed in large in Ernest Becker's The Denial of Death. I recommend this book to the reader. The model also pulls upon the insights of evolutionary psychology. One model of human conditioning that Schmachtenberger discusses is that the rich and powerful then design institution and culture to condition individuals to be aligned with the behaviors that contribute to generating their position. While there is much validity in a model that has places sociological conditioning as a core determent in the development, it is not everything! The **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** version imposes the ideal of existential competence as the aim of one's self-improvement journey and then asks the individual to remap all of the conditioning structures that they have control over to promote such competence.

In modern context most positive and negative feedback is provided in a heavily decoupled from the deployment of scalable heuristics and strategy. One must work to interpret and filter the feedback they receive from the world relative to the level of adaptation the conditioned behavior possesses. Consider the lack information on problem-solving at scale is included in the following conditioning dynamics:

"Thank you for making my coffee so well, here's a tip."  
  
"Good job on this project, here's a promotion."

There is one source of conditioning that modern culture has removed from means of direct control, one that is actually more powerful than many of the conditioning methods that are in place. This conditioning structure is that of *romantic and sexual relationships*. Most feedback one will receive in a relationship with the average girl/ guy will be an assessment of communication skills, looks, status, or security in solving the localized problems of life. As one of the few conditioning structures that the individual has a large degree of control over, it is very easy to decouple the pursuit of this value from any deeper developmental structure and just pursue intimate relationships as a quick source of instinctual or emotional gratification. 

My method of **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** using my intimate relationships stems from the following structure. I use Existential competence the regulator of my emotional *Frame*. If I am shouldering my existential responsibility and behaving accordingly, then I have the strength to be confident in dating. I can willingly subject myself to the pleasure/ pain of intimate relationships, knowing that it is at least partially coupled to my desired path of development. to s the core functionality of this developmental method. I have also designed some relationship models that drive the development existential heroism more directly if such development is a shared goal.

If deploying the **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** method of development with your intimate relationships is too extreme, then there are still other conditioning structures that the individual can regulate. Many of us have likely heard the Jim Rohn's saying that "we are the average of the five people we spend the most time with". You can also map the conditioning effects of those whom you associate with to promote existential heroism. Cut out the friends who are bad influences and refuse to commit to growth. 

One of my personal struggles across the past few years was remapping my sources of gratification away from the pleasures of video games onto deeper sources of meaning. Replacing these conditioning structures that provide decoupled sources of gratification with an **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** developmental process was challenging. However, having done so I believe it strongly contributed towards my ability to grapple with the existential problem landscape in a psychologically grounded manner. 

To summarize, I presented an overview of two potential developmental processes for existential heroism. The **Immortality Quest** functions as a developmental framework that forces those who use selfish incentives to function at scale. Locally **Empathy-Scaling** assigns a greater weight to causes like animal rights, where as the **Immortality Quest** assigns weight to medical advancement. If we take responsibility for both of these local goals as an integrating factor, then the behaviors they produce will converge onto long-term risk management. The second developmental process I suggested is that of **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** through taking responsibility for the conditioning structures they have control over, they can amplify their development to the point where they also arrive at existential heroism.

The following are some points for Daniel and Nate to address:
- Why is empathy scaling the only path you see forward?
- What are your thoughts on the **Immortality Quest** developmental structure? 
- I am worried that current longevity advancement is occurring in a manner isolated from existential responsibility. Can you help me couple current longevity research such that functions to drives individual responsibility for existential risk?
- What are your thoughts on the **Incentive-Deterrent Mapping** method of development?
- Is Daniel only using the **Empathy-Scaling** developmental method, while discounting the other ones a form of self-incapacitation and therefore a from of avoidance? (Written with much love and respect. I am just looking to prompt some self reflection.)
- Where is my attempt to integrate diverse incentive structures to function at scale flawed?